MSC2716: Incrementally importing history into existing rooms (#2716)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/2716-importing-history-into-existing-rooms.md

> # MSC2716: Incrementally importing history into existing rooms

Reviewer: Are we okay to remove this document now, it sounds like we're going for the other approach.

Reviewer 2: cc @ara4n

Reviewer 3: The batch send doc doesn't seem to include the `?ts` param (the one that already existed in synapse, but wasn't specced). It's definitely still needed, but I guess it could be split into a separate MSC

Reviewer 2: @ara4n is good to merge the docs in favor of `/batch_send` ⏩ 

---

`?ts` conversation continued in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2716#discussion_r684441051

For instance, an NNTP bridge might work by letting a user join a room that
maps to a given newsgroup, first showing an empty room, and then importing the
most recent 1000 newsgroup posts for that room to flesh out some history.  The
bridge might then choose to slowly import additional posts for that newsgroup
in the background, until however many decades of backfill were complete.
Finally, as more archives surface, they might also need to be manually
gradually added into the history of the room - slowly building up the complete
history of the conversations over time.

This is currently not supported because:
 * There is no way to set historical room state in a room via the CS or AS API -
   you can only edit current room state.
 * There is no way to create messages in the context of historical room state in
   a room via CS or AS API - you can only create events relative to current room
   state.
 * There is currently no way to override the timestamp on an event via the AS API.
   (We used to have the concept of [timestamp
   massaging](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/application_service/r0.1.2#timestamp-massaging),
   but it never got properly specified)

> ## Proposal

Reviewer 2: *This is a summary of a [discussion in the implementation](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/9247#discussion_r627114589) and a [sync call](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JJDuPfcPNX75fprdTWlxlaKjWOdbdJylbpZ03hzo638/edit) with @erikjohnston and @MadLittleMods.*

If you have some thoughts, we're after your ideas and opinions 👇👈☝👉

## Federation problem scenarios

Currently, the [synapse implementation](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/9247) works over federation and can `/backfill` new servers that join the room after the historical backfill has taken place.

But there are a few tricky scenarios we need to think more about:

 1. When a federated remote server already has all of the room history and more historical messages are imported, the new historical messages won't backfill because `event_backward_extremities` is empty.
 2. Other federated servers can go offline at any time and we want the historical messages to still appear in the pagination later on when someone scrolls up. For example, a federated remote homeserver may go offline, more historical messages are imported by the original HS, and then federated remote comes back online. How do we recover?

## Potential solutions

As an initial note, there no constraint to support existing Synapse versions which don’t know about MSC2716. Existing rooms already don’t have the historical messages now and will get them eventually in any case when they upgrade.

### "Insertion" event

"Insertion" event:

 - We put "insertion" events at the end of each historical chunk imported. The homeserver knows that it needs to check for backfill from these points. Will act like `event_backward_extremities` 
 - They have `content.next_chunk_id` which is an identifier to reference for the next chunk to connect them together
 - The event at the start of each chunk has `content.chunk.id` to reference the previous chunk

The problem we're trying to solve is how a federated remote homeserver knows about these historical messages. How is a "insertion" event different and how does a federated remote homeserver know about the first insertion point to jump off from?

In the most barebones case, we only support "insertion" points from when the room was first created to avoid the problem altogether. This way they are in the main DAG and available for every homeserver has it in its history to try backfilling from. 

Here is an example of multiple chunks of historical messages where the black dots are insertion events:
![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/558581/117921015-985d2d00-b2b5-11eb-8772-b79579d68896.png)

But what if we want dynamic "insertion" events wherever and whenever we want after the fact for existing rooms?

On their own, "insertion" events still have the problem of the federated servers knowing about the first "insertion" point to jump off from (see federation problem scenarios listed above). But we can use a "marker" event to signal the homeserver that an "insertion" event exists in the DAG back in time and they should try to backfill from it when someone scrolls back to that point in time.

### "Marker" event

"Marker" event:

 - Sent as a "live" event to mark/point to an "insertion" event. This way, all homeservers pick up the "marker" event because it's just like any other "live" message sent but then we're able to define the jumping off point in scroll back.
 - Alternatively, sent as a "live" event to mark a previous event as `event_backward_extremities` again so the homeservers know to try to backfill again.

Here is an example with multiple chunks where the square "M" is the "marker" event and the black dots are "insertion" events:
![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/558581/117923956-977aca00-b2ba-11eb-9fb0-4d19dd26f890.png)

---

The "marker" events can become redundant if we decide that "insertion" events for historical messages can only be added at room creation. Which means your historical messages all have to start from that point and chunk away from there. This doesn't seem compatible for our first use case of Gitter though since the rooms are already created.

The "insertion" events can become redundant if we decide use the alternative "marker" event behavior where it can add any previous event back to the `event_backward_extremities` table. This allows for a simplification where we use the existing behavior in the Synapse implementation for multiple chunks(just normal events) and the "marker" events just hint the homeserver to add the `prev_events` back to `event_backward_extremities` whenever we import more historical messages. The "insertion" events do give us an interesting way to piece together chunks and slightly more control for the application service to tie the chunk reconciliation in knots(similar to the DAG) (not sure if the extra ordering matters, what use case?).

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/558581/117927293-a152fc00-b2bf-11eb-9bfd-8ac2536e495c.png)

To move forward, we can use both for now make either redundant if we feel they aren't adding anything. They aren't visible to the user and will paginate just like any other event.

Reviewer 4: That's a good summary, thanks!

> In the most barebones case, we only support "insertion" points from when the room was first created to avoid the problem altogether. This way they are in the main DAG and available for every homeserver has it in its history to try backfilling from.

To be clear: in this scenario you could add an insertion point at any point where you would later want to add history, but the start is usually the only place you'd want to do so I'd have thought.

---

I think the crux of the matter is: do we want to support being able to arbitrarily add history at any point after the fact? Or do we want to have rooms declare up front if there is extra history that will be imported? (It's worth differentiating between what we want in the future, and whether we want to somehow support this for existing rooms to e.g. support Gitter).

Reviewer 2: > I think the crux of the matter is: do we want to support being able to arbitrarily add history at any point after the fact? Or do we want to have rooms declare up front if there is extra history that will be imported? (It's worth differentiating between what we want in the future, and whether we want to somehow support this for existing rooms to e.g. support Gitter).

For our real use cases now with Gitter and Beeper, we only care about inserting history that happened before the room was created. And all the history is known and can be imported in one go. In the case of Gitter, we have to work with existing rooms.

For the other use cases mentioned in this MSC, NNTP (newsgroup) and email, I think they need the flexibility to insert anywhere.

> as more archives surface, they might also need to be manually gradually added into the history of the room

> eg if you're importing a mail or newsgroup archive and you stumble across a lost mbox with a few msgs in retrospect, or if you want to add some offlist context into the convo.
>
> -- https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2716#discussion_r550726014

Reviewer 2: @erikjohnston After poking at this in the Synapse implementation, should it be the responsibility of our `/bulksend` endpoint to add the "insertion" at the end of each chunk and a live "marker" event?

I was thinking maybe we should leave it up to clients to handle it. They pass in a `org.matrix.msc2716.insertion` at the end of their `/bulksend` `events` array, include the `chunk_id` on the first event of their chunk, and use the normal `/send` API to insert the "live" `org.matrix.msc2716.marker` when they want to signal the HS to look back at the insertion.

Reviewer 4: That would work. Though the advantage of having the HS do it is that we can more easily change what the events look like and where we put them without changing clients?

Reviewer 2: Updated the `/bulksend` endpoint to handle all of the "insertion" and "marker" complexity 👍 

The only thing the client has to do is add `chunk_id` to the first event of their chunk. 

I was contemplating whether this could be derived if we set the `?prev_event` as the insertion point. It probably could but we want the `?prev_event` to still be `A` event so the depth is calculated correctly.

Maybe we want to make this more prescriptive as a query parameter on `/bulksend` and we can handle this logic for them, `/bulksend?chunk_id=xxx`

---

Since there is a reverse-chronological (most recent -> oldest) constraint, I've realized the diagrams should look more like this (same structure but just make it more obvious which direction the chunks move in):
![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/558581/118236920-4acef480-b45c-11eb-945c-34abed6383c6.png)

Reviewer 2: Resolving in favor of Resolving in favor of https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2716#discussion_r655859091

> 

Reviewer 2: ## Alternative batch send proposal

This is a summary of our current form [implementation in Synapse](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/9247) for inserting historical messages that came out these linked discussions and findings if you want to read for more context. This comment is meant to be exhaustive so you don't have to though:

 - https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/9247#discussion_r636520393
 - https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2716#discussion_r595458729
 - https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2716#discussion_r630754564
 - https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2716#discussion_r559846587

---

### Expectation

Here is what scrollback is expected to look like in Element:

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/558581/119064795-cae7e380-b9a1-11eb-9366-5e1f5e6370a8.png)

### New batch send approach

Add a new endpoint, `POST /_matrix/client/unstable/org.matrix.msc2716/rooms/<roomID>/batch_send?prev_event=<eventID>&chunk_id=<chunkID>`, which can insert a chunk of events historically back in time next to the given `prev_event`. `chunk_id` comes from `next_chunk_id` in the response of the batch send endpoint and is derived from the "insertion" events added to each chunk. It's not required for the first batch send.
```
# Body
{
    "events": [ ... ],
    "state_events_at_start": [ ... ]
}

# Response
{
  "state_events": [...list of state event ID's we inserted],
  "events": [...list of historical event ID's we inserted],
  "next_chunk_id": "random-unique-string",
}
```

`state_events_at_start` is used to define the historical state events needed to auth the `events` like join events. These events can float outside of the normal DAG. In Synapse, these are called `outlier`'s and won't be visible in the chat history which also allows us to insert multiple chunks without having a bunch of `@mxid joined the room` noise between each chunk.

`events` is chronological chunk/list of events you want to insert. For Synapse, there is a reverse-chronological constraint on chunks so once you insert one chunk of messages, you can only insert older an older chunk after that. tldr; Insert from your most recent chunk of history -> oldest history.

The `state_events`/`events` payload is in **chronological** order (`[0, 1, 2]`) and is processed it in that order so the `prev_events` point to it's older-in-time previous message which is more sane in the DAG. **Depth discussion:** For Synapse, when persisting, we **reverse the list (to make it reverse-chronological)** so we can still get the correct `(topological_ordering, stream_ordering)` so it sorts between A and B as we expect. Why?  `depth` is not re-calculated when historical messages are inserted into the DAG. This means we have to take care to insert in the right order. Events are sorted by `(topological_ordering, stream_ordering)` where `topological_ordering` is just `depth`. Normally, `stream_ordering` is an auto incrementing integer but for `backfilled=true` events, it decrements. Historical messages are inserted all at the same `depth`, and marked as backfilled so the `stream_ordering` decrements and each event is sorted behind the next. (from https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/9247#discussion_r588479201)

With the new process, the DAG will look like:

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/558581/119065959-4f3b6600-b9a4-11eb-9e23-2e3769e74679.png)

Next we add "insertion" and "marker" events into the mix so that federated remote servers can also navigate and to know where/how to fetch historical messages correctly.

To lay out the different types of servers consuming these historical messages (more context on why we need "marker"/"insertion" events):

 1. Local server
    - This can pretty much work out of the box. Just add the events to the database and they're available. The new endpoint is just a mechanism to insert the events.
 1. Federated remote server that already has all scrollback history and then new history is inserted
    - The big problem is how does a HS know it needs to go fetch more history if they already fetched all of the history in the room? We're solving this with "marker" events which are sent on the "live" timeline and point back to the event where we inserted history next to. The HS can then go and backfill the "insertion" event and continue navigating the chunks from there.
 1. Federated remote server that joins a new room with historical messages
    - The federated `/backfill` response will include historical messages so nothing special is needed to support this.
 1. Federated remote server already in the room when history is inserted
    - Depends on whether the HS has the scrollback history for where the history was inserted at. If already has all history, see scenario 2, if doesn't, see scenario 3.
 1. For federated servers already in the room that haven't implemented MSC2716
    - Those homeservers won't have historical messages available because they're unable to navigate the marker/insertion events. But the historical messages would be available once the HS implements MSC2716 and processes the "marker" events that point to the history.

### New approach with "insertion" events

 - With "insertion" events, we just add them to the start of each chronological chunk (where the oldest message in the chunk is). The next older in time chunk can connect to that "insertion" point from the previous chunk.
 - Consideration: the "insertion" events add a new way for an application service to tie the chunk reconciliation in knots(similar to the DAG knots that can happen).

[Mermaid live editor playground link](https://mermaid-js.github.io/mermaid-live-editor/#/edit/eyJjb2RlIjoiZmxvd2NoYXJ0IEJUXG4gICAgc3ViZ3JhcGggbGl2ZVxuICAgICAgICBCIC0tLS0tLS0tLS0tLT4gQVxuICAgIGVuZFxuICAgIFxuICAgIHN1YmdyYXBoIGNodW5rMFxuICAgICAgICBjaHVuazAtMigoXCIyXCIpKSAtLT4gY2h1bmswLTEoKDEpKSAtLT4gY2h1bmswLTAoKDApKSAtLT4gY2h1bmswLWluc2VydGlvblsvaW5zZXJ0aW9uXFxdXG4gICAgZW5kXG5cbiAgICBzdWJncmFwaCBjaHVuazFcbiAgICAgICAgY2h1bmsxLTIoKFwiMlwiKSkgLS0-IGNodW5rMS0xKCgxKSkgLS0-IGNodW5rMS0wKCgwKSkgLS0-IGNodW5rMS1pbnNlcnRpb25bL2luc2VydGlvblxcXVxuICAgIGVuZFxuICAgIFxuICAgIHN1YmdyYXBoIGNodW5rMlxuICAgICAgICBjaHVuazItMigoXCIyXCIpKSAtLT4gY2h1bmsyLTEoKDEpKSAtLT4gY2h1bmsyLTAoKDApKSAtLT4gY2h1bmsyLWluc2VydGlvblsvaW5zZXJ0aW9uXFxdXG4gICAgZW5kXG5cbiAgICBcbiAgICBjaHVuazAtaW5zZXJ0aW9uIC0tLS0tLS0-IEFcbiAgICBjaHVuazEtaW5zZXJ0aW9uIC0tPiBBXG4gICAgY2h1bmsxLTIgLS4tPiBjaHVuazAtaW5zZXJ0aW9uXG4gICAgY2h1bmsyLWluc2VydGlvbiAtLT4gQVxuICAgIGNodW5rMi0yIC0uLT4gY2h1bmsxLWluc2VydGlvbiIsIm1lcm1haWQiOnt9LCJ1cGRhdGVFZGl0b3IiOmZhbHNlfQ)
<details>
<summary>mermaid graph syntax</summary>

```mermaid
flowchart BT
    subgraph live
        B ------------> A
    end
    
    subgraph chunk0
        chunk0-2(("2")) --> chunk0-1((1)) --> chunk0-0((0)) --> chunk0-insertion[/insertion\]
    end

    subgraph chunk1
        chunk1-2(("2")) --> chunk1-1((1)) --> chunk1-0((0)) --> chunk1-insertion[/insertion\]
    end
    
    subgraph chunk2
        chunk2-2(("2")) --> chunk2-1((1)) --> chunk2-0((0)) --> chunk2-insertion[/insertion\]
    end

    
    chunk0-insertion -------> A
    chunk1-insertion --> A
    chunk1-2 -.-> chunk0-insertion
    chunk2-insertion --> A
    chunk2-2 -.-> chunk1-insertion
```

</details>

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/558581/119069613-130c0380-b9ac-11eb-82a8-ed67ada77d71.png)

The structure of the insertion event would look like:
```js
{
  "type": "m.room.insertion",
  "sender": "@example:example.org",
  "content": {
    "m.next_chunk_id": next_chunk_id,
    "m.historical": True,
  },
  # Since the insertion event is put at the start of the chunk,
  # where the oldest event is, copy the origin_server_ts from
  # the first event we're inserting
  "origin_server_ts": events_to_create[0]["origin_server_ts"],
}
```

### "Marker" events

 - A "marker" event points simply back to an "insertion" event.
 - The "marker" event solves the problem of, how does a federated homeserver know about the historical events which won't come down incremental sync? And the scenario where the federated HS already has all the history in the room, so it won't do a full sync of the room again.
 - Unlike the historical events, the "marker" event is sent as a normal event on the "live" timeline so that comes down incremental sync and is available to all homeservers regardless of how much scrollback history they already have.
 - A "marker" event is not needed for every chunk/batch of historical messages. Multiple chunks can be inserted then once we're done importing everything, we can add one "marker" event pointing at the root "insertion" point
    - If more history is decided to be added later, another "marker" can be sent to let the homeservers know again.
 - When a remote federated homeserver, receives a "marker" event, it can mark the "insertion" prev events as needing to backfill from that point again and can fetch the historical messages when the user scrolls back to that area in the future.  For Synapse, we plan to add the details to the `insertion_event_lookups` table. 
    - In Synapse, we discussed not wanting to fetch the "insertion" event when the "marker" comes down the pipe but I've realized that in order to store `insertion_prev_event_id` in the table, we either need to a) add it as part of the "marker" event which works to not fetch anything additional or b) backfill just the "insertion" event to get it. I think I am going to opt for option A though. The plan is to add a new `insertion_event_lookups` table to store which events are marked as insertion points. It stores, `insertion_event_id` and `insertion_prev_event_id` and when we scrollback over `insertion_prev_event_id` again, we trigger some backfill logic to go fetch it. Similar to the `event_backward_extremities` already implemented.
 - We could remove the need for "marker" events if we decided to only allow sending "insertion" events on the "live" timeline at any point where you would later want to add history.  But this isn't compatible with our dynamic insertion use cases like Gitter where the rooms are already created (no "insertion" event at the start of the room), and the examples from this MSC like NNTP (newsgroup) and email which can potentially want to branch off of everything.

So the structure of the "marker" event would look like:
```js
{
    "type": "m.room.marker",
    "sender": "@example:example.org",
    "content": {
        "m.insertion_id": insertion_event.event_id,
        "m.insertion_prev_events": insertion_event.prev_events,
    },
    "room_id": "!jEsUZKDJdhlrceRyVU:example.org"
}
```

### Final thoughts

I've learned a lot from trying to [implement this in Synapse](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/9247).

We wanted to keep historical messages out of incremental sync because not every homeserver needs to know or care about all historical data. The HS just needs to be able to fetch historical messages when someone scrolls back. In Synapse, we're using `backfilled = true` to accomplish this which is already a known quantity because it's used for federation backfill. The big thing we have to work around in Synapse is that the `depth` is not re-calculated with each insertion. 

It's unclear to me how much we want to bend the MSC to the current constraints of Synapse vs the ideal world. Maybe people like the batch send approach better anyway 🤷‍.

After implementing this batch send alternative, thinking about the current proposal in the MSC with re-using the single send API's, it might be workable. I'm stuck here wondering if we made the right decision.

We could use `PUT /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/state/{eventType}/{stateKey}` with `?historical=true` which would create the floating outlier state events. Then we could use `PUT /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/send/{eventType}/{txnId}`, with `?prev_event` pointing at that floating state to auth the event and where we want to insert the event. I've just thought of this now in hindsight after writing this summary so there might be a hole in my logic. I think in my head [during the first discussions](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2716#discussion_r595458729), I had the constraint of the DAG should be a straight chain of prev events up to the event we're inserting next to. But now I realize the state can just float off on its own. 

We still have the problem of federated servers needing to know about the new historical events. So we could use the "marker" events concept to point at the `prev_event` which we hung the historical events off of.

Reviewer 4: > After implementing this batch send alternative, thinking about the current proposal in the MSC with re-using the single send API's, it might be workable. I'm stuck here wondering if we made the right decision.

I think we could have, but I think the batch send API is going to be a lot more ergonomic to use TBH?

Reviewer 4: Also, great write up thank you! :heart:

Reviewer 2: Should we rename `chunk_id` -> `batch_id` to better align with endpoint, `/batch_send`?

Reviewer 5: I'm not confident in my understanding of the implementation challenges, but my ideal case is to feed a replay of Matrix events (with forged timestamps, perhaps from an IRC log, or a custom export from my [22 billion message] application) into either 1) a fresh room, or 2) an existing room, and have those messages appear to an outside observer as always having been there (i.e., a replay of the entire room's historical messages would replicate the state of the room exactly).

Reviewer 2: > have those messages appear to an outside observer as always having been there

@martindale Definitely the same goal we're going after in this MSC :+1:

The one thing that may not happen is historical state being resolved into the current state of the room. So for example, if you insert a join event and message for someone back in time, they might not be listed as a member in the the current state of the room.

Reviewer 5: > The one thing that may not happen is historical state being resolved into the current state of the room. So for example, if you insert a join event and message for someone back in time, they might not be listed as a member in the the current state of the room.

This is generally fine, I think, as we'd likely insert artificial "part" events into our (final) log export.  As long as we can replay the state and the result is indistinguishable from a genuine history (dating back to 1997!), our needs are met! 🥳

Reviewer 2: Added this proposal as a markdown file in the PR so people can comment specifically on the details, see `proposals/2716-batch-send-historical-messages.md`

 1. We let the AS API override the prev_event(s) of an event when injecting it into
    the room, thus letting bridges consciously specify the topological ordering of
    the room DAG.  We do this by adding a `prev_event` querystring parameter on the
    `PUT /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/send/{eventType}/{txnId}` and
    `PUT /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/state/{eventType}/{stateKey}` endpoints.
    The `prev_event` parameter can be repeated multiple times to specify multiple parent

>     event IDs of the event being submitted.  An event must not have more than 20 prev_events.

Reviewer 2: > An event must not have more than 20 prev_events.

For reference, there is a current limit in Synapse of `10`, [`synapse/handlers/message.py#L796`](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/8f75bf1df7f2bcb3ffe0bb89f8fe3351a48769c0/synapse/handlers/message.py#L796)

    If a `prev_event` parameter is not presented, the server assumes the event is being
    appended to the current timeline and calculates the prev_events as normal.  If an

>     unrecognised event ID is specified as a `prev_event`, the request fails with a 404.

Reviewer 3: This feels like it would get complicated if bridges want to backfill events in multiple batches, particularly in terms of inserting membership events.

Say you fill 1000 messages of history initially, and then the user wants another 1000 messages before that; how do you ensure that all the ghosts are in the room? If all the ghosts needed for the first batch were added to the room before the messages, you could start the second batch after those joins, but what if there are messages from members who weren't in the first batch? You'd also need to insert leave events somewhere for all the users who were in the backfill but aren't in the group anymore.

I'm not sure if there's any way to make it easier though (other than having the homeserver somehow do the hard parts, but that's probably not a good solution either)

Author: yeah. i missed this at the time, but agreed it's going to be fiddly to decide where to inject the membership events. one nasty hack could be to just re-add membership events at the beginning of each batch of 1000 messages or so - after all, a no-op membership event is... a no-op.

Reviewer 4: Thanks @MadLittleMods for wading through all of this and trying things out! So much of this stuff only shakes out in the wash.

Where I'm coming from is broadly that modelling these new pieces of old history as disconnected chunks feels like The Right Way of doing this and gives us maximum flexibility, though that is mostly a gut feeling.

> I feel like chronological constraint is a lot smoother. The only extra question is what extra logic do we need to add besides the filter for historical messages on `/sync`?

Having thought about this a bit, I think the main places will be a) federation sending and catchup, b) calculating push actions, and c) sending to (other?) application services.

I think we'll also need to be a little be clever with the `/sync` filtering, as we *do* sometimes send down backfilled/historic events, e.g. when doing an initial sync or joining a new room we send down the last N events.

> If going down reverse chronological route, can we ignore the permissions for sending historical messages? As long as clients can fill in the avatar/display name of historical messages from the current room state, that seems like it could work.

We'll need to have the correct state (otherwise it won't work for remote server), but given we have created the room I think we should have all the permissions we need to conjure up the state. I'm not actually sure how we'd do the state correctly in the chronological case, as we can't easily mess with state without inserting a bunch of joins/leaves into the timeline that didn't really happen, which I think will look quite confusing.

Reviewer 2: For the chronological case, I think we can just insert the `m.room.membership` as we see new authors of the messages. If the next author is someone new, we just add a join for them, then add their message. I'm not seeing how this involves extra join/leaves. People just "join" as we see them in the conversation.

Does state resolve correctly here?

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/558581/111664582-ec7cf100-87df-11eb-887a-c7e43bee2bf5.png)

---

Thinking about the reverse-chronological case, We could insert historical state events one event up so their depth is lower than all of the historical messages. Does state resolve correctly here?

 - Both `A` and `Ω` are some primordial events.
 - We hang historical state off `Ω`
 - We hang historical messages off of `A`

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/558581/111662767-37960480-87de-11eb-9cc2-f4f6e9e4b01c.png)

Reviewer 4: > For the chronological case, I think we can just insert the `m.room.membership` as we see new authors of the messages. If the next author is someone new, we just add a join for them, then add their message. I'm not seeing how this involves extra join/leaves. People just "join" as we see them in the conversation.
> 
> Does state resolve correctly here?

The state will resolve correctly. I think the problem is that we'll keep seeing "user X joined the room" when they were already in the room, and this'll get repeated for every chunk of messages we import? So something like:

```
Alice joined the room
Bob joined the room
Charlies joined the room
Alice: Hi Bob!
Bob: Hi Alice and Charlie!
Charlie: Hey!
.... <more messages> ...
Alice joined the room
Bob joined the room
C harlies joined the room
.... <more messages> ...
```

> Thinking about the reverse-chronological case, We could insert historical state events one event up so their depth is lower than all of the historical messages. Does state resolve correctly here? This would nicely simplify this case!

We won't actually need to insert the state events anywhere, its fine for them to be "floating" (basically pretending they're somewhere in the depths of history). So the API could just be:

```json
{
    "events": [ ... ],
    "state_events_at_start": [ ... ]
}
```

then we persist `state_events_at_start` as "outliers" (in Synpase parlance), then can persist the set of events based on that set of state?

Reviewer 2: > We won't actually need to insert the state events anywhere, its fine for them to be "floating" (basically pretending they're somewhere in the depths of history). So the API could just be:

I can try this out!

@erikjohnston It's not clear to me how to make an outlier. I assume no `prev_events` defined but how do I make future events not tie them in as well (forward extremity lookup for next "live" event)?

It's unclear to me how the floating outlier events resolve in the state correctly. If a "live" `m.room.member` state event does not work for a historical message (403), how does a floating event show the user in the room at the right time to allow the message to be sent?

Reviewer 4: > @erikjohnston It's not clear to me how to make an outlier. I assume no `prev_events` defined but how do I make future events not tie them in as well (forward extremity lookup for next "live" event)?

There's a few things I think we need to do to make this work:

1. We'll probably still need to include a `prev_event`, but we can just make up an event ID for it
2. The `auth_events` do need to be real events, as we'll auth the event against them.
3. To mark an event as an outlier we set `event.internal_metadata.outlier = False`, and that should be done *before* we compute the event context. There are examples in `synapse.handlers.federation`, but I don't think we ever do that at the moment for events from clients, so not 100% if other changes will be necessary (we might need to skip some checks/processing).
4. 
> It's unclear to me how the floating outlier events resolve in the state correctly. If a "live" m.room.member state event does not work for a historical message (403), how does a floating event show the user in the room at the right time to allow the message to be sent?

We're basically making a new disconnected graph where we get to make up the state at the start, e.g. if we want to send historical events: `A <- B <- C` we persist that as a chunk and we get to choose the state at `A`. In such a case we won't show the state in the timeline, but all the auth checks will Do The Right Thing.

Reviewer 2: Thanks @erikjohnston! I've took my first stab at this in https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/pull/9247 and https://github.com/matrix-org/complement/pull/68/ but we can discuss more details there!

I think we got an path forward API-wise figured out here 😺

Reviewer 2: Resolving in favor of https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2716#discussion_r655859091

>     unrecognised event ID is specified as a `prev_event`, the request fails with a 404.

Reviewer 2: Testing out the current Synapse code around `prev_events` for federated backfilling -> will throw a `403` `No create event in auth events` when an unknown event ID is provided there.

 2. We also let the AS API override ('massage') the `origin_server_ts` timestamp applied

>     to sent events.  We do this by adding a `ts` querystring parameter on the

Reviewer 2: > The batch send doc doesn't seem to include the `?ts` param (the one that already existed in synapse, but wasn't specced). It's definitely still needed, but I guess it could be split into a separate MSC
>
> https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2716#discussion_r684358987

@tulir Another proposal sounds good 👍. This MSC is converging on `/batch_send`

I'm curious why it's still necessary? What use case, etc?

Reviewer 3: My bridges use it for all messages (even new ones) to preserve original timestamps. Also not sure if catchup backfill (after bridge restarts and such) should use batch sending?

Reviewer 2: If you're adding to the front of the DAG, it feels like the normal `send` endpoint is the one to use. If someone has chatted in between from where you wanted to backfill, it seems like `/batch_send` is the thing to use 🤔

---

I see how `ts` would still be necessary 👍 And it's privileged to app services 🔒

Reviewer 3: Separate MSC done: #3316

Reviewer: I think this is resolvable now, thanks for the separate MSC @tulir

    `PUT /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/send/{eventType}/{txnId}` and
    `PUT /_matrix/client/r0/rooms/{roomId}/state/{eventType}/{stateKey}`endpoints, specifying

>     the value to apply to `origin_server_ts` on the event (UNIX epoch milliseconds).

Reviewer 2: I noticed in the Synapse code that we already accept a `ts` query parameter to override the `origin_server_ts` if the request is coming from an app service, [`synapse/rest/client/v1/room.py#L233-L234`](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/f2c1560eca1e2160087a280261ca78d0708ad721/synapse/rest/client/v1/room.py#L233-L234)

Reviewer 3: Yes, backfilling already exists in multiple bridges, only inserting old history that isn't possible yet. The `ts` parameter was also removed from the spec because the exact behavior with some endpoints wasn't defined properly.

This MSC doesn't change the `ts` query parameter, it just re-adds it to the spec.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the clarification! `ts` already in Synapse which is spec'ed here ✅

>  3. Finally, we can add a optional `"m.historical": true` field to events to

Reviewer: In the `content`? Would clients be able to see this flag (and potentially show UI to show it was historical)?

Reviewer 3: In `content` and being visible to other clients would make the most sense

Reviewer: I think this has been decided on.

>  3. Finally, we can add a optional `"m.historical": true` field to events to

Reviewer: We should be explicit here though:

```suggestion
 3. Finally, we can add a optional `"m.historical": true` field to the event `content` to
```

    indicate that they are historical at the point of being added to a room, and
    as such servers should not serve them to clients via the CS `/sync` API -
    instead preferring clients to discover them by paginating scrollback via
    `/messages`.

This lets history be injected at the right place topologically in the room.  For instance, different eras of the room could
end up as branches off the original `m.room.create` event, each first setting up the contextual room state for that era before
the block of imported history.  So, you could end up with something like this:

```
m.room.create
     |\
     | \___________________________________
     |            \                        \
     |             \                        \

> live timeline    previous 1000 messages   another block of ancient history

Reviewer 6: Backfilling via `/messages` works by walking back up `prev_events`. If the DAG looks like this, we'll never hit different eras so `/messages` will return 0 events.

Reviewer 6: I don't think this works because the `/messages` endpoint has no idea when to jump to a different era. That endpoint topologically walks the DAG (in Dendrite it does this by `depth`), meaning if you actually did this you would get interleaved events as each era's events start producing the same `depth` values. This at least returns the events in the forks, but not where you want them.

Reviewer 6: In addition, doing this would produce forwards extremities at the end of each era, which servers will attempt to merge.

Author: so my expectation is that a homeserver should calculate the an appropriate depth when importing history like this, probably by tiebreaking based on origin_server_ts.  Where does Dendrite get its depth param from?  As it certainly shouldn't be trusting the one it receives over federation, because of https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/1229.

Author: also, the fact that we create forward extremities at the end of each era which then get merged by the next message sent in the room was intended to be a feature, not a bug.

Reviewer 2: From our meeting, the depth is assumed from the stream ID and can be spoofed.

Author: So having rediscussed this IRL: Dendrite (and Synapse) currently get their depth parameters used for ordering from the wire.  Ideally, we'd calculate the depth parameter instead - which could be easy, if we mandate that blocks of old history are always loaded contiguously in reverse chronological order.  As a quick fudge to test the approach however we could set depth=1 for these events, and hopefully the default ordering will be sufficient (we think it is on synapse, but dendrite might need a tweak).

> live timeline    previous 1000 messages   another block of ancient history

Reviewer 2: @Kegsay @neilalexander and I also discussed changing the sort on `/messages` to be by `origin_server_ts`. We send events in as normal with `m.historical` and then sort by `origin_server_ts`.

This could end up with missing messages because servers will have different times set based on how accurate and sync. Easily see a scenario something could be off by 15 minutes. But we could also hybrid where it does the normal DAG tree walk for messages up to a day and `origin_server_ts` after that.

Author: This is pretty evil because the state will be desynced with the timeline; we'll lose historical display names & avatars (unless we assume they are set sequentially); and it generally feels like we're bodging around the problem of not having a good way to model depth.

Reviewer 2: Resolving this as we've moved past this idea.

> live timeline    previous 1000 messages   another block of ancient history

Reviewer 2: To summarize a [sync meeting](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1KnByw2HmXX-i_VcWuDHVmcFc-BDLFb3QvZ68NM56uE8/edit) we had today with @erikjohnston @ara4n @neilalexander @Kegsay @MadLittleMods:

We can use chunks!

The diagram below illustrates `1 <- 2 <- 3` as the legacy history we're trying to import. This assumes that the history occurs between `A` and `B`. Now trying to document this concept, when trying to import history before `A`, how do we find an existing event that occurs before A to splice into?

The `*` event ties everything together and heals the state. It defines the `prev_events` as `3`, `B`, and `D`(tip/forward extremity)

![](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/558581/104972162-8a0d9d00-59b6-11eb-8461-330b97090b06.png)

<details>
<summary>ASCII diagram</summary>

```
+---+ 1 <--+ 2 <--+ 3 <---+-----------------+
|                         |                 |
|          +--------------+                 |
|          |                                |
v          v                                +
A <------+ B <------+ C <------+ D <------+ *
```

</details>

More details:

 - Do we heal the chunks after an import or leave them floating with an (ignored) forward extremity? Does old state contribute to current state?
    - Yes, if we can. There is some worry that the state resolution algorithm might handle this unexpectedly but if it works, we can go for it.  Specifically bad things can happen around PL changes on the fork and and then subsequent kicks/bans.
    - It would be nice to heal the state so the users show up in the current room state
    - If we don’t heal, we’ll need to hide the extremities and not soft fail them
 - For the time-being there will be a chronological constraint when importing history. So once you import the first chunk of history, you can't import another piece earlier.
    - We will use `depth: 1` or the same depth as `prev_event` of where the fork started. The pagination is sorted by depth and will tiebreak based on the timestamp. This will allow us to back paginate from `A -> 1`.
       - We can't use negative depth because there is a bunch of assertions that it's not negative in Synapse.
    - This probably works pretty much out of the box for Synapse since it counts depth backwards but on Dendrite it counts forwards (might be the other way around but Dendrite needs some work).
    - Once we refactor the Synapse/Dendrite codebases to calculate depth ourselves(instead of relying on assuming it from the stream ID), we can remove this constraint.

> live timeline    previous 1000 messages   another block of ancient history

Reviewer 7: We should get https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/3263 resolved as a requirement for this MSC

Reviewer 2: It doesn't seem strictly necessary. We can insert events back in time and `/messages` can return them however it does now (Synapse does `(topological_ordering, stream_ordering)`).

Generally, it seems good to resolve and clarify what happens in the API though.

Reviewer 7: The problem with this approach is that clients may have cached the messages and don't call /messages again, so will not be able to learn about ancient history.

Reviewer 2: With the batch send proposal, we solve this by sending a "marker" event on the live timeline to indicate that there is history back somewhere.

I thought it might only need to be interpreted by the homeserver, but the client could also use it for cache busting.

Reviewer 2: In a [sync meeting with @ara4n](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1KCEmpnGr4J-I8EeaVQ8QJZKBDu53ViI7V62y5BzfXr0/edit#bookmark=id.67nio1ka8znc), we came up with the idea to make the `marker` events as state events. When the client sees that the `m.room.marker` state changed to a different event ID, it can throw away all of the timeline and re-fetch as needed.

In terms of state performance, there could be thousands of `marker` events in a room but it's no different than room members joining and leaving over and over like an IRC room.

---

For homeservers where the same problem can happen: "If a server joins after a "marker" event is sent, it could be lost in the middle of the timeline and they could jump back in time past the "marker" and never pick it up." (https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2716#discussion_r782499674),

We probably don't want to throw away the whole timeline but it can go up the `unsigned.replaces_state` chain of the `m.room.marker` state events to get them all.

```

We consciously don't support the new `parent` and `ts` parameters on the
various helper syntactic-sugar APIs like `/kick` and `/ban`.  If a bridge/bot is
smart enough to be faking history, it is already in the business of dealing
with raw events, and should not be using the syntactic sugar APIs.

## Potential issues

There are a bunch of security considerations here - see below.

This doesn't provide a way for a HS to tell an AS that a client has tried to call
/messages beyond the beginning of a room, and that the AS should try to
lazy-insert some more messages (as per https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/698).

> For this MSC to be properly useful, we might want to flesh that out.

Reviewer 3: Just to add a small note: a major problem with the existing appservice query APIs is that they don't include who is querying, so they're hard to use in bridges that require logging in. If a similar query API is added here, it should include the ID of the user who's asking for history.

Reviewer 2: Added to the MSC 👍

## Alternatives

We could insist that we use the SS API to import history history in this manner rather than

> extending the AS API.  However, it seems unnecessarily burdensome to make bridge authors

Reviewer 6: No, you can't use the SS API as an alternative. This MSC is trying to inject historical events which is not what the SS API does: interleaves historical events with current events. This distinction matters because we strictly do NOT want to mix state / messages with what's already in the room, but all the existing machinery in servers is designed to mix/merge/resolve semi-current messages together into a coherent linear view.

Author: i think you have missed the point of the MSC, which is to exploit state resolution in order to just treat the historical messages as a (very) old fork of the room.  Which is precisely what SS API does.  Typically the forks are short-lived, but there's absolutely nothing stopping them being weeks/months/years old.  And this MSC just takes that to the logical stream of "what if the fork was as old as the age of the room itself"?

I suggest we talk this through en masse rather than assume i've got it all wrong ;)

Reviewer 5: > i think you have missed the point of the MSC, which is to exploit state resolution in order to just treat the historical messages as a (very) old fork of the room. Which is precisely what SS API does. Typically the forks are short-lived, but there's absolutely nothing stopping them being weeks/months/years old. And this MSC just takes that to the logical stream of "what if the fork was as old as the age of the room itself"?
> 
> I suggest we talk this through en masse rather than assume i've got it all wrong ;)

On the note of "fork resolution" — is there any likelihood that we'll see a pluggable consensus mechanism around this (in Synapse or otherwise)?  For example, if I wanted to resolve conflicting "tips" using, say, a proof of work?

Author: > I suggest we talk this through en masse rather than assume i've got it all wrong ;)

We talked through it en masse and reckon it's worth giving this approach a go to see how well it performs.

>  is there any likelihood that we'll see a pluggable consensus mechanism around this

State resolution is already pluggable via [Room Versions](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/#id5). Please don't add PoW though; it wastes enough CPU already :)

understand the SS API, especially when we already have so many AS API bridges.  Hence these
minor extensions to the existing AS API.

Another way of doing this might be to store the different eras of the room as
different versions of the room, using `m.room.tombstone` events to form a
linked list of the eras. This has the advantage of isolating room state
between different eras of the room, simplifying state resolution calculations
and avoiding risk of any cross-talk.  It's also easier to reason about, and

> avoids exposing the DAG to bridge developers.  However, it would require

Reviewer 6: This seems like the best alternative because it will actually work. @MadLittleMods makes a good point about search not working correctly across multiple rooms, but this is definitely tractable.

Reviewer 2: I chatted with @Half-Shot in the Gitter sync call and he mentioned that Element might have some code to follow connected rooms and search across the upgrade which makes this even more viable!

Author: The problems with tombstones are:
 * It redundantly duplicates all the state over different room versions
 * How do servers join old rooms?
 * Clients end up in loads of rooms

It's not /that/ bad, but it feels pretty clunky imo.

Reviewer 2: Related to https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2716#discussion_r684572863, added as part of the problem to this alternative.

better presentation of room versions in clients, and it would require support
for retrospectively specifying the `predecessor` of the current room when you
retrospectively import history.  Currently `predecessor` is in the immutable
`m.room.create` event of a room, so cannot be changed retrospectively - and

> doing so in a safe and race-free manner sounds Hard.

Reviewer 6: There's no reason why this data can't be put into a normal 0-length state event. The only reason why you'd want this in the create event is to avoid tampering retrospectively but that's exactly what we want to do here.

Author: True. I wonder why i thought retrospectively setting a blank-statekey `m.room.predecessor` event would be Hard.. I'm pretty sure i had a good reason, but I'm blanking on it now.  Perhaps @richvdh with his tombstone-wrangler hat on might remember why we put predecessor details in `m.room.create` rather than a field of their own.  Agreed that it might be better to just thread eras together via tombstones than exploit stateres if we can.

Author: actually, a big problem with using tombstones to stitch together different eras of the room is if you just want to inject a few lost old messages - eg if you're importing a mail or newsgroup archive and you stumble across a lost mbox with a few msgs in retrospect, or if you want to add some offlist context into the convo. You wouldn't want to create a whole new room with its own tombstones and splice it in just to insert a few random lost msgs.

Reviewer 2: Added the "big problem "with this approach to the MSC 👍

  allowed to serve them (based on metadata in the m.room.create event). Thus
  you'd have a perimeter in the DAG beyond which events are no longer
  decentralised or signed, but are blindly trusted to let HSes insert ancient
  history provided by ASes.

However, this feels needlessly complicated if the DAG approach is sufficient.

## Security considerations

This allows an AS to tie the room DAG in knots by specifying inappropriate
event IDs as parents, potentially DoSing the state resolution algorithm, or
triggering undesired state resolution results. This is already possible by the
SS API today however, and given AS API requires the homeserver admin to
explicitly authorise the AS in question, this doesn't feel too bad.

This also makes it much easier for an AS to maliciously spoof history.  This
is a bit unavoidable given the nature of the feature, and is also possible
today via SS API.

If the state changes from under us due to importing history, we have no way to
tell the client about it.  This is an [existing
bug](https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/issues/4508) that can be triggered
today by SS API traffic, so is orthogonal to this proposal.

> ## Unstable prefix

Reviewer: Note, field names are prefixed with `org.matrix.msc2716.` while this is unstable (at least, that's what Synapse does).

> Feels unnecessary.

Reviewer 3: It might be useful to have an unstable feature flag to check if the homeserver supports this
